.\"
.\" render_hkl man page
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2012 Thomas White <taw@physics.org>
.\"
.\" Part of CrystFEL - crystallography with a FEL
.\"

.TH RENDER_HKL 1
.SH NAME
render_hkl \- render 2D slices of reciprocal space from reflection data
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
.B render_hkl [\fIoptions\fR] \fB...\fR \fB-p\fR \fIunitcell.pdb\fR \fIfile.hkl\fR
.PP
\fBrender_hkl --help\fI

.SH DESCRIPTION
render_hkl takes a set of reflection data and plots 2D central sections of the reciprocal lattice as circles using a colour scale in a PDF file.  You need to provide, at a minimum, the reflection data and a PDB file with at least a CRYST1 line containing the unit cell parameters.

.SH OPTIONS
.PD 0
.IP "\fB-d\fR \fIh,k,l\fR"
.IP \fB--down=\fR\fIh,k,l\fR
.PD
Specify the indices for the downward direction of the resulting plot.  Default: \fB--down=1,0,0\fR.


.PD 0
.IP "\fB-r\fR \fIh,k,l\fR"
.IP \fB--right=\fR\fIh,k,l\fR
.PD
Specify the indices for the 'right' direction of the resulting plot.  The direction will be approximately to the right, the exact direction depending on the unit cell.  Default: \fB--right=0,1,0\fR.

.PD 0
.IP "\fB--zone=\fR\fIz\fR
.PD
Show reflections for which \fBg\fR.\fBr\fR=\fIz\fR, where \fBg\fR is the
reflection index (i.e. hkl) and \fBr\fR is the zone axis direction.  \fIz\fR
hence represents the Laue zone number.

.PD 0
.IP "\fB-o\fR \fIfilename\fR"
.IP \fB--output=\fR\fIfilename\fR
.PD
Write the output (in PDF format) to \fIfilename\fR.  Default: \fB--output=za.pdf\fR.

.PD 0
.IP "\fB-p\fR \fIunitcell.cell\fR"
.IP "\fB-p\fR \fIunitcell.pdb\fR"
.IP \fB--pdb=\fR\fIunitcell.pdb\fR
.PD
Specify the name of the file containing unit cell information, in PDB or CrystFEL format.

.PD 0
.IP \fB--boost=\fR\fIn\fR
.PD
Squash the colour scale by a factor of \fIn\fR.  When \fIn\fR=1, the top of the colour scale will represent the highest intensity found in the \fIdata set\fR (not the highest intensity found in the \fIprojection\fR).

.PD 0
.IP "\fB-y\fR \fIpointgroup\fR"
.IP \fB--symmetry=\fR\fIpointgroup\fR
.PD
Specify the symmetry of the reflection list.

.PD 0
.IP "\fB-c\fR \fIscale\fR"
.IP \fB--colscale=\fR\fIscale\fR
.PD
Use \fIscale\fR as the colour scale.  Possible scales are: \fBmono\fR, \fBinvmono\fR and \fBcolour\fR.

.PD 0
.IP "\fB-w\fR \fIweight\fR"
.IP \fB--weighting=\fR\fIweight\fR
.PD
Colour the reciprocal lattice points according to \fIweight\fR.  Possibilities for \fIweight\fR are:
.RS
.IP \fBI\fR
.PD
The intensities of the reflections
.IP \fBsqrtI\fR
.PD
The square roots of the intensities of the reflections.  Negative intensities will be set to zero.
.IP \fBcount\fR
.PD
The numbers of observations of the reflections.  The numbers will be corrected for the point group multiplicities of the reflections according to the given symmetry (see \fB--symmetry\fR).
.IP \fBrawcts\fR
.PD
The raw numbers of observations of the reflections, without performing the correction described for \fBcount\fR.
.RE
.PP
The default is \fB--weighting=I\fR.

.PD 0
.IP \fB--colour-key\fR
.PD
Write the selected colour scale out to 'key.pdf' in the current directory.

.PD 0
.IP \fB--res-ring=\fBres\fR
.PD
Draw a resolution ring at \fIres\fR Angstroms.  You can use this option multiple times to get more than one ring.

.PD 0
.IP \fB--highres=\fBres\fR
.PD
Render spots only up to  \fIres\fR Angstroms.

.SH AUTHOR
This page was written by Thomas White.

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to <taw@physics.org>, or visit <http://www.desy.de/~twhite/crystfel>.

.SH COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER
Copyright © 2012 Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, a research centre of the Helmholtz Association.
.P
render_hkl, and this manual, are part of CrystFEL.
.P
CrystFEL is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.P
CrystFEL is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details.
.P
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with CrystFEL.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR crystfel (7),
.BR check_hkl (1),
.BR hdfsee (1)
